# OptiTenseurs
The goal of this project is to implement algorithms capable of finding the best order of contraction of any tensor train, given the size of each vertex's dimension.

# Structure

* 'results' : contains all exported results, it is the default root directory for output files.
* 'instances' : contains the network files, it is the default root directory for input files.
* 'src' : contains all the main algorithms (divided in their own sub-directories), the components that define the networks and some types, as well as the main .cpp file that will process the execution queue.
* 'tools' : contains quality-of-life programs such as the code that displays a TT, the code to test contraction orders, and the code to generate instances.
* 'GUI' : contains the python code for the graphical user interface.

# Compiling
This program is compiled using xmake, you can use the following command :  
```
mkdir [build_directory]
```  
```
xmake f -o [build_directory] 
```
(default is 'build')  
```
xmake b [target]
```  
The targets are :  

* AllEdgeByEdge  
* AllSplits  
* ConvexSplits  
* GreedyEdgeSort  
* OneSideDimByDim  
* SplitsDimByDim  
* OptiTenseurs, which is the general caller to the other algorithms

# Executing
You can run the program using  
```
xmake run -w . [target] [file_name]
``` 
(although this is deprecated and not recommanded)  
or  
```
xmake run -w . OptiTenseurs -a dictionary1 ... dictionaryN -f network_file1 ... network_fileN -o output_file
```  
Where each dictionary is a string with format : "key1 val1 key2 val2 ... keyn valn"
The keys are :  

* "main_alg" : (Algorithm name) The main solver, corresponds to the target and .cpp name (default : none)
* "dmin" : (integer) Minimum size in number of vertex, edge, or dimension (depends on the main algorithm) of the network the algorithm can handle, before delegating to sub_alg. (default : 1) (Not implemented) 
* "dmax" : (integer) Limiting factor in number of vertex, edge, or dimension (depends on the main algorithm). Implementation varies for each algorithm. Limits the size of the sub-networks that can be considered/generated by the algorithm, the accumulation of edges (default : depends on algorithm)
* "sub_alg" : (Algorithm name) Secondary algorithm to solve networks of size < dmin. (Not implemented) (default : none)
* "start_sol" : (Algorithm name) Algorithm to initialize the solution with, for pruning. (Implemented, but not fully operational) (default : none)
* "time" : (integer) Time alloted to an algorithm for each execution (in minutes). After a timeout an algorithm is kicked out of the execution queue permanently (default : 10)
* "test" : ({0, 1}) Wheter the solution found by the algorithm should be tested. For debugging purpose, not available for every algorithm (default : 0) (only available to the algorithms which contraction order we manage to recover)

An example of a valid command can be found in exec_example.sh.

Alternatively, you can use the GUI to select the parameters and execute the code. You can also use it to generate the execution command and copy it to your clipboard.

# Networks
Networks are text files located in the 'instances' directory. They can be read by the programs in order to be solved.
They are formatted in the following way :  

* Lines starting with 'c' are comment lines, and are not taken into account by the execution
* Lines starting with 'v' are a representation of the Tensor Train
* One single line starts with 'd' followed by the dimension (width) of the TT
* Lines starting with 'e' describe edges, they read 'node1 node2 weight'

Examples of input files can be found in the 'instances/test/' directory.

# Algorithms
The code currently supports 6 algorithms.
We note D, the dimension of a network.
We note "explicit edges" the edges of the network, and "implicit edges" the edges of weight 1 that implicitly link every vertices together.

1. ### AllSplits
    * Type : exact, dynamic programming
    * Description : Solves every possible splits (over the vertices) of the network
    * Complexity : 2^4D

2. ### AllEdgeByEdge 
    * Type : theoretically exact (need proof), iterative (edges)
    * Description : Solves every contraction order of the network
    * Complexity : 
    * Remark : Unlike AllSplits which consider every splits possible, this algorithm only considers the explicit edges.

3. ### ConvexSplits
    * Type : heuristic (close to exact), dynamic programming
    * Description : Solves every possible convex splits (over the vertices) of the network
    * Complexity : 
    * dmax : Limits how many edges can be crossed when splitting
    * Remark : By virtue of being unable to generate concave sub-problem, this algorithm is not exact. However it is unlikely to find a network where the optimal solution would require a concave decomposition. Determining the best and worst network-structure for this algorithm could be interesting.

4. ### GreedyEdgeSort
    * Type : greedy, iterative (edges)
    * Description : Solves a single contraction order, sorts the edges by weight^2/contraction_cost (descending order), re-computed at each iteration.
    * Complexity : D*log(D!)
    * Remark : This algorithm attempts to minimize the overall weight of the network, while not skyrocketting the final cost. This strategy is both cheap and consistently good, which makes its solution a good starting point for any algorithm. Additionaly, a thorough analysis of the network could provide information that would allow more constraint to be added in order to approach the optimal solution.

5. ### OneSideDimByDim
    * Type : heuristic, iterative (edges + dimensions)
    * Description : Explores the solutions by going from one side of the network to the other. Contracts 2 edges in {upper, central, lower} per dimension.
    * Complexity : 
    * dmax : The amount of central edges that can be accumulated
    * Remark : Each dimension is composed of 3 edges, two lateral and one central. Once 2 edges have been contracted on that dimension, the remaining edge fuses with the next central edge. Hence why it is interesting to limit how many central edges can fuse together.

6. ### SplitsDimByDim :
    * Type : heuristic, iterative (dimensions) + dynamic programming
    * Description : Iterates over d in [1, dmax], then splits the network in 2 sub-networks of dimensions d and D-d.
    * Complexity : 
    * dmax : 

# GUI
In order to ease the execution of many algorithms with different parameters on many files, a basic Graphical User Interface is provided.  
It is recommanded to have python 3.* installed to use the GUI.  

## Launching
You can launch the gui by executing OptiGUI, or by directly using python3 GUI/main.py.

## Functionalities
The GUI provides the ability to add algorithm entries, tweak the parameters, add network files, select an output file, copy the execution command to clipboard, and launch the execution.  
It will only display the parameters available/relevant for the selected algorithms.  
Currently, launching the execution directly from the interface will lock it, hence why it may be interesting to copy the command and execute it separately.

# Results
If [output_file] is specified, the resulting file contains for each algorithm used, their parameters, the resulting cost, the time to solve, and the network and its caracteristics. Algorithms that timed-out are omitted.  
If the output file does not exist prior to the execution, it will be created by the program. If it already exists, the new results will be added at the end of the file.  
The default delimiter is ';' and cannot easily be modified yet.  
An example of output file is provided in the 'results/' directory.